adding expressions dev_docs tutorial (#101004)
elastic/kibana: dev_docs/tutorials/expressions.mdx

---
id: kibDevTutorialExpressions
slug: /kibana-dev-docs/tutorials/expressions
title: Kibana Expressions Service
summary: Kibana Expressions Service
date: 2021-06-01
tags: ['kibana', 'onboarding', 'dev', 'architecture']
---

## Expressions service

Expression service exposes a registry of reusable functions primary used for fetching and transposing data and a registry of renderer functions that can render data into a DOM element. 
Adding functions is easy and so is reusing them. An expression is a chain of functions with provided arguments, which given a single input translates to a single output. 
Each expression is representable by a human friendly string which a user can type.

### creating expressions

Here is a very simple expression string: 
`essql 'select column1, column2 from myindex' | mapColumn name=column3 fn='{ column1 + 3 }' | table`

It consists of 3 functions:
 - essql which runs given sql query against elasticsearch and returns the results

>  - mapColumn which computes a new column from existing ones

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `mapColumn`, which computes a new column from existing ones;
```

>  - table which prepares the data for rendering in a tabular format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `table`, which prepares the data for rendering in a tabular format.
```

> Same expression could also be constructed in the code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same expression could also be constructed in the code:
```

```ts

> import { buildExpression, buildExpressionFunction } from '../../src/plugins/expressions';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { buildExpression, buildExpressionFunction } from 'src/plugins/expressions';
```

const expression = buildExpression([
  buildExpressionFunction<ExpressionFunctionEssql>('essql', [ q: 'select column1, column2 from myindex' ]),
  buildExpressionFunction<ExpressionFunctionMapColumn>('mapColumn', [ name: 'column3', expression: 'column1 + 3' ]),
  buildExpressionFunction<ExpressionFunctionTable>('table'),
]
```

Note: Consumers need to be aware which plugin registers specific functions with expressions function registry and import correct type definitions from there.

<DocCallOut title="Server Side Search">
  The `expressions` service is available on both server and client, with similar APIs.
</DocCallOut>

> ### running expressions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Running expressions
```

Expression service exposes `execute` method which allows you to execute an expression:

```ts
const executionContract = expressions.execute(expression, input);
const result = await executionContract.getData();
```

<DocCallOut title="Server Side Search">
  Check the full spec of execute function [here](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/master/docs/development/plugins/expressions/public/kibana-plugin-plugins-expressions-public.execution.md)
</DocCallOut>

> On top of that in the browser there are two additional ways to run expressions and render the results:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, on the browser side, there are two additional ways to run expressions and render the results.
```

> #### react expression renderer component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### React expression renderer component
```

This is the easiest way to get expressions rendered inside your application.  

```ts

>   <ReactExpressionRenderer expression={expression} />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<ReactExpressionRenderer expression={expression} />
```

```

<DocCallOut title="Server Side Search">
  Check the full spec of ReactExpressionRenderer component props [here](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/master/docs/development/plugins/expressions/public/kibana-plugin-plugins-expressions-public.reactexpressionrendererprops.md)
</DocCallOut>

> #### expression loader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Expression loader
```

> If you are not using react you can use the loader expression service provides to achieve the same:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are not using React, you can use the loader expression service provides to achieve the same:
```

```ts

>   const handler = loader(domElement, expression, params);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const handler = loader(domElement, expression, params);
```

```

<DocCallOut title="Server Side Search">
  Check the full spec of expression loader params [here](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/master/docs/development/plugins/expressions/public/kibana-plugin-plugins-expressions-public.iexpressionloaderparams.md)
</DocCallOut>

> ### creating new expression functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating new expression functions
```

> Adding new functions to expressions is easy, just call `registerFunction` method on expressions service setup contract with your function definition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating a new expression function is easy, just call `registerFunction` method on expressions service setup contract with your function definition:
```

```ts

>   const functionDefinition = {
>      name: 'clog',
>      args: {},
>      help: 'Outputs the context to the console',
>      fn: (input: unknown) => {
>        // eslint-disable-next-line no-console
>        console.log(input);
>        return input;
>      },
>   };
>   
>   expressions.registerFunction(functionDefinition);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const functionDefinition = {
   name: 'clog',
   args: {},
   help: 'Outputs the context to the console',
   fn: (input: unknown) => {
     // eslint-disable-next-line no-console
     console.log(input);
     return input;
   },
};

expressions.registerFunction(functionDefinition);
```

```

<DocCallOut title="Server Side Search">
  Check the full interface of ExpressionFuntionDefinition [here](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/master/docs/development/plugins/expressions/public/kibana-plugin-plugins-expressions-public.expressionfunctiondefinition.md)
</DocCallOut>

> ### creating new expression renderers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating new expression renderers
```

> ### creating new expression renderers

Reviewer: Maybe worth describing what are "renderers".

Adding new renderers is just as easy as adding functions:

```ts

>   const rendererDefinition = {
>      name: 'debug',
>      help: 'Outputs the context to the dom element',
>      render: (domElement, input, handlers) => {
>        // eslint-disable-next-line no-console
>        domElement.innerText = JSON.strinfigy(input);
>        handlers.done();
>      },
>   };
>   
>   expressions.registerRenderer(rendererDefinition);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const rendererDefinition = {
   name: 'debug',
   help: 'Outputs the context to the dom element',
   render: (domElement, input, handlers) => {
     // eslint-disable-next-line no-console
     domElement.innerText = JSON.strinfigy(input);
     handlers.done();
   },
};

expressions.registerRenderer(rendererDefinition);
```
